VSCode: Use Docker profile to enable debugger functionality in a flask container. (#933)
ccmbioinfo/stager: docs/vscode.md

-   [vscode-icons](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vscode-icons-team.vscode-icons)
-   [export-index](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=BrunoLM.export-index)

The ESLint and Prettier integrations can be configured to fix and format your code on save.
The Python integration can be configured to use Black as a formatter and run checks with Pylint,
whether they are globally installed or in a virtualenv. Sample `.vscode/settings.json`:

```json
{
    "[typescript]": {
        "editor.formatOnSave": true
    },
    "[typescriptreact]": {
        "editor.formatOnSave": true
    },
    "[python]": {
        "editor.formatOnSave": true
    },
    "editor.codeActionsOnSave": {
        "source.fixAll.eslint": true,
        "source.organizeImports": false
    },
    "python.testing.pytestArgs": ["flask"],
    "python.testing.unittestEnabled": false,
    "python.testing.nosetestsEnabled": false,
    "python.testing.pytestEnabled": true,
    "python.formatting.provider": "black",
    "python.formatting.blackPath": "flask/venv/bin/black",
    "python.linting.pylintEnabled": true,
    "python.linting.enabled": true
}
```

> ## VSCode debugger for flask container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Debugging in the Flask container
```

> VSCode debugger: [https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging]
> VSCode & remote containers: [https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/containers]
> Using profiels with Compose: [docs.docker.com/compose/profiles]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [Debugging in VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging)
-   [Remote - Containers extension](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/containers)
-   [Using profiles with Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/profiles/)
```

To set up a development environment with Flask, Docker and VSCode when the docker context points to the local machine, see the steps below. If the Flask application container is running on the VM, an additional step is required to set the local docker context to point to the docker instance on the VM.

> 

Reviewer: This is extraneous.

To directly enter a Docker development that supports debugging in the container and launch the debugger:

> -   Step 1: `docker-compose up -d mysql minio app_debug`

Reviewer: Should only need `docker-compose up -d app_debug` since the dependencies are specified in the compose file.

-   Step 2, Click on remote connection icon in VSCode, choose "Attach to running container".
-   Step 3, When the prompt "Select the container to the attach VS Code" comes up, choose "/stager-app_debug_1".

> -   Step 4, In the VSCode window that runs in the app container, use F5 to launch the debugger.

Reviewer: Use markdown ordered lists for these and later cases.

```markdown
1. Thing
1. Other thing
1. Next step
```

To start the Docker development without debugging functionality enabled, and later enable the debugger functionality:

-   Step 1: `docker-compose up`

> -   Step 2: Stop and remove the Docker container `app`

Author: It's not possible to remove a running app, so we have to stop it first.

> -   Step 2: Stop and remove the Docker container `app`

Reviewer: Hm, try `docker-compose rm -s app` instead, sorry.

> -   Step 2: Stop and remove the Docker container `app`

Reviewer: Or `docker-compose -sf app` to skip the confirmation prompt.

-   Step 4, Click on remote connection icon in VSCode, choose "Attach to running container".
-   Step 5, When the prompt "Select the container to the attach VS Code" comes up, choose "/stager-app_debug_1".
-   Step 6, In the VSCode window that runs in the app container, use F5 to launch the debugger.

Explanation:

-   Debugpy extension is already added to `requirements-dev.txt` and `requirements-dev.in`.
-   `app_debug` is a service added in `docker-compose.yaml`. By using profile, this service is only started when it is targeted.

# Other explored options:

### Option 1: Reopen the VSCode in container, starting the flask app only when the debugger session starts in the container.

Conor's working solution.
Set the entrypoint to `tail -f /dev/null` in `./devcontainer/docker-compose.yml` such that the flask app is not started when we reopen the VSCode session in the container. When we launch the debugger, the app is started using the `launch` request in `.vscode/launch.json`.

Install the necessary extensions for the container in `.vscode/extensions.json`.

### Option 2: Attach to a running container, kill the flask app right before the debugger is launched.

> This is an ideal solution. We don't have a working version of it yet. Here's the proposed workflow:

Reviewer: Is this an 'ideal' solution if it doesn't exist?

Author: I will remove all the options because they are still in the experimental stage (except that option 1 is Conor's working solution. However option 1 is not about attaching to a running container, so I think it's ok to not include it). Also, these options will require more modifications to the settings in `docker-compose` files or `.vscode` directory than the current solution using "profile".

    },
    "editor.codeActionsOnSave": {
        "source.fixAll.eslint": true,
        "source.organizeImports": false
    },
    "python.testing.pytestArgs": ["flask"],
    "python.testing.unittestEnabled": false,
    "python.testing.nosetestsEnabled": false,
    "python.testing.pytestEnabled": true,
    "python.formatting.provider": "black",
    "python.formatting.blackPath": "flask/venv/bin/black",
    "python.linting.pylintEnabled": true,
    "python.linting.enabled": true
}
```

## Debugging in the Flask container

-   [Debugging in VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging)
-   [Remote - Containers extension](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/containers)
-   [Using profiles with Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/profiles/)

To enable the debugger functionality:

1. `docker-compose rm -sf app` (if the Flask app container is running)
2. `docker-compose up app_debug`
3. Click on remote connection icon in VSCode, choose "Attach to running container".
4. When the prompt "Select the container to the attach VS Code" comes up, choose "/stager-app_debug_1".
5. In the VSCode window that runs in the app container, use F5 to launch the debugger.

> 

Reviewer 2: Again I'm not sure if anyone else encountered this problem so it's purely a suggested edit for now 
```suggestion
6. In the scenario where VSCode does not automatically attach to `Flask (stager)` and instead a drop down menu is prompted, without the `Flask (stager)` option, you will need to add `/usr/src/stager` as a folder to the Explorer on the left and open a `.py` file for the appropriate option to appear.  
```

whether they are globally installed or in a virtualenv. Sample `.vscode/settings.json`:

```json
{
    "[typescript]": {
        "editor.formatOnSave": true
    },
    "[typescriptreact]": {
        "editor.formatOnSave": true
    },
    "[python]": {
        "editor.formatOnSave": true
    },
    "editor.codeActionsOnSave": {
        "source.fixAll.eslint": true,
        "source.organizeImports": false
    },
    "python.testing.pytestArgs": ["flask"],
    "python.testing.unittestEnabled": false,
    "python.testing.nosetestsEnabled": false,
    "python.testing.pytestEnabled": true,
    "python.formatting.provider": "black",
    "python.formatting.blackPath": "flask/venv/bin/black",
    "python.linting.pylintEnabled": true,
    "python.linting.enabled": true
}
```

## Debugging in the Flask container

-   [Debugging in VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging)
-   [Remote - Containers extension](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/containers)
-   [Using profiles with Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/profiles/)

To directly enter a Docker development that supports debugging in the container and launch the debugger:

> 

Reviewer: I think we can delete this line as well?

Author: This section presents a set of steps to bring up the debugger directly, whereas the next section presents how to bring up the debugger while there's a Flask app running. However, I will delete this section and only keep the second one.

1. `docker-compose up -d app_debug`
2. Click on remote connection icon in VSCode, choose "Attach to running container".
3. When the prompt "Select the container to the attach VS Code" comes up, choose "/stager-app_debug_1".
4. In the VSCode window that runs in the app container, use F5 to launch the debugger.

To start the Docker development without debugging functionality enabled, and later enable the debugger functionality:

> 1. `docker-compose up`

Reviewer: I think we can take out this first step, it's not actually part of the procedure.

2. `docker-compose rm -sf app`
3. `docker-compose up app_debug`
4. Click on remote connection icon in VSCode, choose "Attach to running container".
5. When the prompt "Select the container to the attach VS Code" comes up, choose "/stager-app_debug_1".
6. In the VSCode window that runs in the app container, use F5 to launch the debugger.

Explanation:

> -   Debugpy extension is already added in `requirements-dev.txt` and `requirements-dev.in`.
> -   `app_debug` is a service added in `docker-compose.yaml`. By using profile, this service is only started when it is targeted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`debugpy` has been added to dev requirements. `app_debug` is a separate service in the Compose file. By assigning it a profile, it will only be started when targeted, but the host port binding conflicts with the regular `app` container.
```

Author: "but the host port binding conflicts with the regular `app` container" 

This is true but this wouldn't be a problem if we stop and remove the `app` container.
